Two-Stream Convolutional Networks
for Action Recognition in Videos
Karen Simonyan Andrew Zisserman
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
fkaren,azg@robots.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
We investigate architectures of discriminatively trained deep Convolutional Net-
works (ConvNets) for action recognition in video. The challenge is to capture
the complementary information on appearance from still frames and motion be-
tween frames. We also aim to generalise the best performing hand-crafted features
within a data-driven learning framework.
Our contribution is three-fold. First, we propose a two-stream ConvNet architec-
ture which incorporates spatial and temporal networks. Second, we demonstrate
that a ConvNet trained on multi-frame dense optical ﬂow is able to achieve very
good performance in spite of limited training data. Finally, we show that multi-
task learning, applied to two different action classiﬁcation datasets, can be used to
increase the amount of training data and improve the performance on both.
Our architecture is trained and evaluated on the standard video actions bench-
marks of UCF-101 and HMDB-51, where it is competitive with the state of the
art. It also exceeds by a large margin previous attempts to use deep nets for video
classiﬁcation.
1 Introduction
Recognition of human actions in videos is a challenging task which has received a signiﬁcant amount
of attention in the research community [11, 14, 17, 26]. Compared to still image classiﬁcation, the
temporal component of videos provides an additional (and important) clue for recognition, as a
number of actions can be reliably recognised based on the motion information. Additionally, video
provides natural data augmentation (jittering) for single image (video frame) classiﬁcation.
In this work, we aim at extending deep Convolutional Networks (ConvNets) [19], a state-of-the-
art still image representation [15], to action recognition in video data. This task has recently been
addressed in [14] by using stacked video frames as input to the network, but the results were signif-
icantly worse than those of the best hand-crafted shallow representations [20, 26]. We investigate
a different architecture based on two separate recognition streams (spatial and temporal), which
are then combined by late fusion. The spatial stream performs action recognition from still video
frames, whilst the temporal stream is trained to recognise action from motion in the form of dense
optical ﬂow. Both streams are implemented as ConvNets. Decoupling the spatial and temporal nets
also allows us to exploit the availability of large amounts of annotated image data by pre-training
the spatial net on the ImageNet challenge dataset [1]. Our proposed architecture is related to the
two-streams hypothesis [9], according to which the human visual cortex contains two pathways: the
ventral stream (which performs object recognition) and the dorsal stream (which recognises motion);
though we do not investigate this connection any further here.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 1.1 we review the related work on action
recognition using both shallow and deep architectures. In Sect. 2 we introduce the two-stream
architecture and specify the Spatial ConvNet. Sect. 3 introduces the Temporal ConvNet and in
particular how it generalizes the previous architectures reviewed in Sect. 1.1. A mult-task learning
framework is developed in Sect. 4 in order to allow effortless combination of training data over
1arXiv:1406.2199v2  [cs.CV]  12 Nov 2014multiple datasets. Implementation details are given in Sect. 5, and the performance is evaluated
in Sect. 6 and compared to the state of the art. Our experiments on two challenging datasets (UCF-
101 [24] and HMDB-51 [16]) show that the two recognition streams are complementary, and our
deep architecture signiﬁcantly outperforms that of [14] and is competitive with the state of the art
shallow representations [20, 21, 26] in spite of being trained on relatively small datasets.
1.1 Related work
Video recognition research has been largely driven by the advances in image recognition methods,
which were often adapted and extended to deal with video data. A large family of video action
recognition methods is based on shallow high-dimensional encodings of local spatio-temporal fea-
tures. For instance, the algorithm of [17] consists in detecting sparse spatio-temporal interest points,
which are then described using local spatio-temporal features: Histogram of Oriented Gradients
(HOG) [7] and Histogram of Optical Flow (HOF). The features are then encoded into the Bag Of
Features (BoF) representation, which is pooled over several spatio-temporal grids (similarly to spa-
tial pyramid pooling) and combined with an SVM classiﬁer. In a later work [28], it was shown that
dense sampling of local features outperforms sparse interest points.
Instead of computing local video features over spatio-temporal cuboids, state-of-the-art shallow
video representations [20, 21, 26] make use of dense point trajectories. The approach, ﬁrst in-
troduced in [29], consists in adjusting local descriptor support regions, so that they follow dense
trajectories, computed using optical ﬂow. The best performance in the trajectory-based pipeline
was achieved by the Motion Boundary Histogram (MBH) [8], which is a gradient-based feature,
separately computed on the horizontal and vertical components of optical ﬂow. A combination of
several features was shown to further boost the accuracy. Recent improvements of trajectory-based
hand-crafted representations include compensation of global (camera) motion [10, 16, 26], and the
use of the Fisher vector encoding [22] (in [26]) or its deeper variant [23] (in [21]).
There has also been a number of attempts to develop a deep architecture for video recognition. In
the majority of these works, the input to the network is a stack of consecutive video frames, so the
model is expected to implicitly learn spatio-temporal motion-dependent features in the ﬁrst layers,
which can be a difﬁcult task. In [11], an HMAX architecture for video recognition was proposed
with pre-deﬁned spatio-temporal ﬁlters in the ﬁrst layer. Later, it was combined [16] with a spatial
HMAX model, thus forming spatial (ventral-like) and temporal (dorsal-like) recognition streams.
Unlike our work, however, the streams were implemented as hand-crafted and rather shallow (3-
layer) HMAX models. In [4, 18, 25], a convolutional RBM and ISA were used for unsupervised
learning of spatio-temporal features, which were then plugged into a discriminative model for action
classiﬁcation. Discriminative end-to-end learning of video ConvNets has been addressed in [12]
and, more recently, in [14], who compared several ConvNet architectures for action recognition.
Training was carried out on a very large Sports-1M dataset, comprising 1.1M YouTube videos of
sports activities. Interestingly, [14] found that a network, operating on individual video frames,
performs similarly to the networks, whose input is a stack of frames. This might indicate that
the learnt spatio-temporal features do not capture the motion well. The learnt representation, ﬁne-
tuned on the UCF-101 dataset, turned out to be 20% less accurate than hand-crafted state-of-the-art
trajectory-based representation [20, 27].
Our temporal stream ConvNet operates on multiple-frame dense optical ﬂow, which is typically
computed in an energy minimisation framework by solving for a displacement ﬁeld (typically at
multiple image scales). We used a popular method of [2], which formulates the energy based on
constancy assumptions for intensity and its gradient, as well as smoothness of the displacement ﬁeld.
Recently, [30] proposed an image patch matching scheme, which is reminiscent of deep ConvNets,
but does not incorporate learning.
2 Two-stream architecture for video recognition
Video can naturally be decomposed into spatial and temporal components. The spatial part, in the
form of individual frame appearance, carries information about scenes and objects depicted in the
video. The temporal part, in the form of motion across the frames, conveys the movement of the
observer (the camera) and the objects. We devise our video recognition architecture accordingly,
dividing it into two streams, as shown in Fig. 1. Each stream is implemented using a deep ConvNet,
softmax scores of which are combined by late fusion. We consider two fusion methods: averaging
and training a multi-class linear SVM [6] on stacked L2-normalised softmax scores as features.
2conv1  
7x7x96  
stride 2  
norm.  
pool 2x2  conv2  
5x5x256  
stride 2  
norm.  
pool 2x2  conv3  
3x3x512  
stride 1  conv4  
3x3x512  
stride 1  conv5  
3x3x512  
stride 1  
pool 2x2  full6 
4096  
dropout  full7 
2048  
dropout  softmax  
 
conv1  
7x7x96  
stride 2  
norm.  
pool 2x2  conv2  
5x5x256  
stride 2  
pool 2x2  conv3  
3x3x512  
stride 1  conv4  
3x3x512  
stride 1  conv5  
3x3x512  
stride 1  
pool 2x2  full6 
4096  
dropout  full7 
2048  
dropout  softmax  
 Spatial stream ConvNet  
Temporal stream ConvNet  
single frame  
input  
video  
multi -frame  
optical flow  class 
score  
fusion  
Figure 1: Two-stream architecture for video classiﬁcation.
Spatial stream ConvNet operates on individual video frames, effectively performing action recog-
nition from still images. The static appearance by itself is a useful clue, since some actions are
strongly associated with particular objects. In fact, as will be shown in Sect. 6, action classiﬁcation
from still frames (the spatial recognition stream) is fairly competitive on its own. Since a spatial
ConvNet is essentially an image classiﬁcation architecture, we can build upon the recent advances
in large-scale image recognition methods [15], and pre-train the network on a large image classiﬁca-
tion dataset, such as the ImageNet challenge dataset. The details are presented in Sect. 5. Next, we
describe the temporal stream ConvNet, which exploits motion and signiﬁcantly improves accuracy.
3 Optical ﬂow ConvNets
In this section, we describe a ConvNet model, which forms the temporal recognition stream of our
architecture (Sect. 2). Unlike the ConvNet models, reviewed in Sect. 1.1, the input to our model is
formed by stacking optical ﬂow displacement ﬁelds between several consecutive frames. Such input
explicitly describes the motion between video frames, which makes the recognition easier, as the
network does not need to estimate motion implicitly. We consider several variations of the optical
ﬂow-based input, which we describe below.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
 (e)
Figure 2: Optical ﬂow. (a),(b): a pair of consecutive video frames with the area around a mov-
ing hand outlined with a cyan rectangle. (c): a close-up of dense optical ﬂow in the outlined area;
(d): horizontal component dxof the displacement vector ﬁeld (higher intensity corresponds to pos-
itive values, lower intensity to negative values). (e): vertical component dy. Note how (d) and (e)
highlight the moving hand and bow. The input to a ConvNet contains multiple ﬂows (Sect. 3.1).
3.1 ConvNet input conﬁgurations
Optical ﬂow stacking. A dense optical ﬂow can be seen as a set of displacement vector ﬁelds dt
between the pairs of consecutive frames tandt+ 1. By dt(u;v)we denote the displacement vector
at the point (u;v)in framet, which moves the point to the corresponding point in the following
framet+ 1. The horizontal and vertical components of the vector ﬁeld, dx
tanddy
t, can be seen
as image channels (shown in Fig. 2), well suited to recognition using a convolutional network. To
represent the motion across a sequence of frames, we stack the ﬂow channels dx;y
tofLconsecutive
frames to form a total of 2Linput channels. More formally, let wandhbe the width and height
of a video; a ConvNet input volume I2Rwh2Lfor an arbitrary frame is then constructed as
follows:
I(u;v;2k 1) =dx
+k 1(u;v); (1)
I(u;v;2k) =dy
+k 1(u;v); u = [1;w];v= [1;h];k= [1;L]:
For an arbitrary point (u;v), the channels I(u;v;c );c= [1; 2L]encode the motion at that point
over a sequence of Lframes (as illustrated in Fig. 3-left).
3Trajectory stacking. An alternative motion representation, inspired by the trajectory-based de-
scriptors [29], replaces the optical ﬂow, sampled at the same locations across several frames, with
the ﬂow, sampled along the motion trajectories. In this case, the input volume I, corresponding to
a frame, takes the following form:
I(u;v;2k 1) =dx
+k 1(pk); (2)
I(u;v;2k) =dy
+k 1(pk); u = [1;w];v= [1;h];k= [1;L]:
where pkis thek-th point along the trajectory, which starts at the location (u;v)in the frame and
is deﬁned by the following recurrence relation:
p1= (u;v); pk=pk 1+d+k 2(pk 1); k> 1:
Compared to the input volume representation (1), where the channels I(u;v;c )store the displace-
ment vectors at the locations (u;v), the input volume (2) stores the vectors sampled at the locations
pkalong the trajectory (as illustrated in Fig. 3-right).
input volume channels  
                 at point  
input volume channels  
                 at point  
Figure 3: ConvNet input derivation from the multi-frame optical ﬂow. Left: optical ﬂow stack-
ing (1) samples the displacement vectors dat the same location in multiple frames. Right: trajectory
stacking (2) samples the vectors along the trajectory. The frames and the corresponding displace-
ment vectors are shown with the same colour.
Bi-directional optical ﬂow. Optical ﬂow representations (1) and (2) deal with the forward optical
ﬂow, i.e. the displacement ﬁeld dtof the frame tspeciﬁes the location of its pixels in the following
framet+ 1. It is natural to consider an extension to a bi-directional optical ﬂow, which can be
obtained by computing an additional set of displacement ﬁelds in the opposite direction. We then
construct an input volume Iby stackingL=2forward ﬂows between frames and+L=2andL=2
backward ﬂows between frames  L=2and. The inputIthus has the same number of channels
(2L) as before. The ﬂows can be represented using either of the two methods (1) and (2).
Mean ﬂow subtraction. It is generally beneﬁcial to perform zero-centering of the network input,
as it allows the model to better exploit the rectiﬁcation non-linearities. In our case, the displacement
vector ﬁeld components can take on both positive and negative values, and are naturally centered in
the sense that across a large variety of motions, the movement in one direction is as probable as the
movement in the opposite one. However, given a pair of frames, the optical ﬂow between them can
be dominated by a particular displacement, e.g. caused by the camera movement. The importance
of camera motion compensation has been previously highlighted in [10, 26], where a global motion
component was estimated and subtracted from the dense ﬂow. In our case, we consider a simpler
approach: from each displacement ﬁeld dwe subtract its mean vector.
Architecture. Above we have described different ways of combining multiple optical ﬂow displace-
ment ﬁelds into a single volume I2Rwh2L. Considering that a ConvNet requires a ﬁxed-size
input, we sample a 2242242Lsub-volume from Iand pass it to the net as input. The hid-
den layers conﬁguration remains largely the same as that used in the spatial net, and is illustrated
in Fig. 1. Testing is similar to the spatial ConvNet, and is described in detail in Sect. 5.
3.2 Relation of the temporal ConvNet architecture to previous representations
In this section, we put our temporal ConvNet architecture in the context of prior art, drawing con-
nections to the video representations, reviewed in Sect. 1.1. Methods based on feature encod-
ings [17, 29] typically combine several spatio-temporal local features. Such features are computed
from the optical ﬂow and are thus generalised by our temporal ConvNet. Indeed, the HOF and MBH
4local descriptors are based on the histograms of orientations of optical ﬂow or its gradient, which
can be obtained from the displacement ﬁeld input (1) using a single convolutional layer (containing
orientation-sensitive ﬁlters), followed by the rectiﬁcation and pooling layers. The kinematic features
of [10] (divergence, curl and shear) are also computed from the optical ﬂow gradient, and, again, can
be captured by our convolutional model. Finally, the trajectory feature [29] is computed by stack-
ing the displacement vectors along the trajectory, which corresponds to the trajectory stacking (2).
In Sect. 3.3 we visualise the convolutional ﬁlters, learnt in the ﬁrst layer of the temporal network.
This provides further evidence that our representation generalises hand-crafted features.
As far as the deep networks are concerned, a two-stream video classiﬁcation architecture of [16]
contains two HMAX models which are hand-crafted and less deep than our discriminatively trained
ConvNets, which can be seen as a learnable generalisation of HMAX. The convolutional models
of [12, 14] do not decouple spatial and temporal recognition streams, and rely on the motion-
sensitive convolutional ﬁlters, learnt from the data. In our case, motion is explicitly represented
using the optical ﬂow displacement ﬁeld, computed based on the assumptions of constancy of the
intensity and smoothness of the ﬂow. Incorporating such assumptions into a ConvNet framework
might be able to boost the performance of end-to-end ConvNet-based methods, and is an interesting
direction for future research.
3.3 Visualisation of learnt convolutional ﬁlters
96 1 2 
flow 1  
flow 10  
flow 1  
flow 10  conv. filters on  
vertical flow  
components  𝑑𝑦 
 conv. fliters  on 
horizontal flow  
components  𝑑𝑥 
 
temporal  
derivative  
spatial  
derivative  
Figure 4: First-layer convolutional ﬁlters learnt on 10 stacked optical ﬂows. The visualisation
is split into 96 columns and 20 rows: each column corresponds to a ﬁlter, each row – to an input
channel.
In Fig. 4 we visualise the convolutional ﬁlters from the ﬁrst layer of the temporal ConvNet, trained
on the UCF-101 dataset. Each of the 96ﬁlters has a spatial receptive ﬁeld of 77pixels, and spans
20 input channels, corresponding to the horizontal ( dx) and vertical ( dy) components of 10stacked
optical ﬂow displacement ﬁelds d.
As can be seen, some ﬁlters compute spatial derivatives of the optical ﬂow, capturing how mo-
tion changes with image location, which generalises derivative-based hand-crafted descriptors (e.g.
MBH). Other ﬁlters compute temporal derivatives, capturing changes in motion over time.
4 Multi-task learning
Unlike the spatial stream ConvNet, which can be pre-trained on a large still image classiﬁcation
dataset (such as ImageNet), the temporal ConvNet needs to be trained on video data – and the
available datasets for video action classiﬁcation are still rather small. In our experiments (Sect. 6),
training is performed on the UCF-101 and HMDB-51 datasets, which have only: 9.5K and 3.7K
videos respectively. To decrease over-ﬁtting, one could consider combining the two datasets into
one; this, however, is not straightforward due to the intersection between the sets of classes. One
option (which we evaluate later) is to only add the images from the classes, which do not appear in
the original dataset. This, however, requires manual search for such classes and limits the amount
of additional training data.
A more principled way of combining several datasets is based on multi-task learning [5]. Its aim
is to learn a (video) representation, which is applicable not only to the task in question (such as
HMDB-51 classiﬁcation), but also to other tasks (e.g. UCF-101 classiﬁcation). Additional tasks act
as a regulariser, and allow for the exploitation of additional training data. In our case, a ConvNet
architecture is modiﬁed so that it has twosoftmax classiﬁcation layers on top of the last fully-
5connected layer: one softmax layer computes HMDB-51 classiﬁcation scores, the other one – the
UCF-101 scores. Each of the layers is equipped with its own loss function, which operates only on
the videos, coming from the respective dataset. The overall training loss is computed as the sum of
the individual tasks’ losses, and the network weight derivatives can be found by back-propagation.
5 Implementation details
ConvNets conﬁguration. The layer conﬁguration of our spatial and temporal ConvNets is schemat-
ically shown in Fig. 1. It corresponds to CNN-M-2048 architecture of [3] and is similar to the
network of [31]. All hidden weight layers use the rectiﬁcation (ReLU) activation function; max-
pooling is performed over 33spatial windows with stride 2; local response normalisation uses the
same settings as [15]. The only difference between spatial and temporal ConvNet conﬁgurations is
that we removed the second normalisation layer from the latter to reduce memory consumption.
Training. The training procedure can be seen as an adaptation of that of [15] to video frames, and
is generally the same for both spatial and temporal nets. The network weights are learnt using the
mini-batch stochastic gradient descent with momentum (set to 0.9). At each iteration, a mini-batch
of 256 samples is constructed by sampling 256 training videos (uniformly across the classes), from
each of which a single frame is randomly selected. In spatial net training, a 224224sub-image is
randomly cropped from the selected frame; it then undergoes random horizontal ﬂipping and RGB
jittering. The videos are rescaled beforehand, so that the smallest side of the frame equals 256. We
note that unlike [15], the sub-image is sampled from the whole frame, not just its 256256center.
In the temporal net training, we compute an optical ﬂow volume Ifor the selected training frame as
described in Sect. 3. From that volume, a ﬁxed-size 2242242Linput is randomly cropped and
ﬂipped. The learning rate is initially set to 10 2, and then decreased according to a ﬁxed schedule,
which is kept the same for all training sets. Namely, when training a ConvNet from scratch, the rate
is changed to 10 3after 50K iterations, then to 10 4after 70K iterations, and training is stopped
after 80K iterations. In the ﬁne-tuning scenario, the rate is changed to 10 3after 14K iterations, and
training stopped after 20K iterations.
Testing. At test time, given a video, we sample a ﬁxed number of frames ( 25in our experiments)
with equal temporal spacing between them. From each of the frames we then obtain 10 ConvNet
inputs [15] by cropping and ﬂipping four corners and the center of the frame. The class scores for the
whole video are then obtained by averaging the scores across the sampled frames and crops therein.
Pre-training on ImageNet ILSVRC-2012. When pre-training the spatial ConvNet, we use the
same training and test data augmentation as described above (cropping, ﬂipping, RGB jittering).
This yields 13:5%top-5 error on ILSVRC-2012 validation set, which compares favourably to 16:0%
reported in [31] for a similar network. We believe that the main reason for the improvement is
sampling of ConvNet inputs from the whole image, rather than just its center.
Multi-GPU training. Our implementation is derived from the publicly available Caffe toolbox [13],
but contains a number of signiﬁcant modiﬁcations, including parallel training on multiple GPUs
installed in a single system. We exploit the data parallelism, and split each SGD batch across several
GPUs. Training a single temporal ConvNet takes 1 day on a system with 4 NVIDIA Titan cards,
which constitutes a 3:2times speed-up over single-GPU training.
Optical ﬂow is computed using the off-the-shelf GPU implementation of [2] from the OpenCV
toolbox. In spite of the fast computation time ( 0:06s for a pair of frames), it would still introduce
a bottleneck if done on-the-ﬂy, so we pre-computed the ﬂow before training. To avoid storing
the displacement ﬁelds as ﬂoats, the horizontal and vertical components of the ﬂow were linearly
rescaled to a [0;255] range and compressed using JPEG (after decompression, the ﬂow is rescaled
back to its original range). This reduced the ﬂow size for the UCF-101 dataset from 1.5TB to 27GB.
6 Evaluation
Datasets and evaluation protocol. The evaluation is performed on UCF-101 [24] and
HMDB-51 [16] action recognition benchmarks, which are among the largest available annotated
video datasets1. UCF-101 contains 13K videos (180 frames/video on average), annotated into 101
action classes; HMDB-51 includes 6.8K videos of 51 actions. The evaluation protocol is the same
1Very recently, [14] released the Sports-1M dataset of 1.1M automatically annotated YouTube sports videos.
Processing the dataset of such scale is very challenging, and we plan to address it in future work.
6for both datasets: the organisers provide three splits into training and test data, and the performance
is measured by the mean classiﬁcation accuracy across the splits. Each UCF-101 split contains 9.5K
training videos; an HMDB-51 split contains 3.7K training videos. We begin by comparing different
architectures on the ﬁrst split of the UCF-101 dataset. For comparison with the state of the art, we
follow the standard evaluation protocol and report the average accuracy over three splits on both
UCF-101 and HMDB-51.
Spatial ConvNets. First, we measure the performance of the spatial stream ConvNet. Three sce-
narios are considered: (i) training from scratch on UCF-101, (ii) pre-training on ILSVRC-2012
followed by ﬁne-tuning on UCF-101, (iii) keeping the pre-trained network ﬁxed and only training
the last (classiﬁcation) layer. For each of the settings, we experiment with setting the dropout regu-
larisation ratio to 0:5or to 0:9. From the results, presented in Table 1a, it is clear that training the
ConvNet solely on the UCF-101 dataset leads to over-ﬁtting (even with high dropout), and is inferior
to pre-training on a large ILSVRC-2012 dataset. Interestingly, ﬁne-tuning the whole network gives
only marginal improvement over training the last layer only. In the latter setting, higher dropout
over-regularises learning and leads to worse accuracy. In the following experiments we opted for
training the last layer on top of a pre-trained ConvNet.
Table 1: Individual ConvNets accuracy on UCF-101 (split 1).
(a)Spatial ConvNet.
Training settingDropout ratio
0:5 0:9
From scratch 42.5% 52.3%
Pre-trained + ﬁne-tuning 70.8% 72.8%
Pre-trained + last layer 72.7% 59.9%(b)Temporal ConvNet.
Input conﬁgurationMean subtraction
off on
Single-frame optical ﬂow ( L= 1) - 73.9%
Optical ﬂow stacking (1) ( L= 5) - 80.4%
Optical ﬂow stacking (1) ( L= 10 ) 79.9% 81.0%
Trajectory stacking (2)( L= 10 ) 79.6% 80.2%
Optical ﬂow stacking (1)( L= 10 ), bi-dir. - 81.2%
Temporal ConvNets. Having evaluated spatial ConvNet variants, we now turn to the temporal
ConvNet architectures, and assess the effect of the input conﬁgurations, described in Sect. 3.1. In
particular, we measure the effect of: using multiple ( L=f5;10g) stacked optical ﬂows; trajectory
stacking; mean displacement subtraction; using the bi-directional optical ﬂow. The architectures
are trained on the UCF-101 dataset from scratch, so we used an aggressive dropout ratio of 0:9to
help improve generalisation. The results are shown in Table 1b. First, we can conclude that stacking
multiple (L>1) displacement ﬁelds in the input is highly beneﬁcial, as it provides the network with
long-term motion information, which is more discriminative than the ﬂow between a pair of frames
(L= 1setting). Increasing the number of input ﬂows from 5to10leads to a smaller improvement,
so we keptLﬁxed to 10in the following experiments. Second, we ﬁnd that mean subtraction is
helpful, as it reduces the effect of global motion between the frames. We use it in the following
experiments as default. The difference between different stacking techniques is marginal; it turns
out that optical ﬂow stacking performs better than trajectory stacking, and using the bi-directional
optical ﬂow is only slightly better than a uni-directional forward ﬂow. Finally, we note that temporal
ConvNets signiﬁcantly outperform the spatial ConvNets (Table 1a), which conﬁrms the importance
of motion information for action recognition.
We also implemented the “slow fusion” architecture of [14], which amounts to applying a ConvNet
to a stack of RGB frames ( 11frames in our case). When trained from scratch on UCF-101, it
achieved 56:4%accuracy, which is better than a single-frame architecture trained from scratch
(52:3%), but is still far off the network trained from scratch on optical ﬂow. This shows that while
multi-frame information is important, it is also important to present it to a ConvNet in an appropriate
manner.
Multi-task learning of temporal ConvNets. Training temporal ConvNets on UCF-101 is challeng-
ing due to the small size of the training set. An even bigger challenge is to train the ConvNet on
HMDB-51, where each training split is 2:6times smaller than that of UCF-101. Here we evaluate
different options for increasing the effective training set size of HMDB-51: (i) ﬁne-tuning a temporal
network pre-trained on UCF-101; (ii) adding 78classes from UCF-101, which are manually selected
so that there is no intersection between these classes and the native HMDB-51 classes; (iii) using the
multi-task formulation (Sect. 4) to learn a video representation, shared between the UCF-101 and
HMDB-51 classiﬁcation tasks. The results are reported in Table 2. As expected, it is beneﬁcial to
7Table 2: Temporal ConvNet accuracy on HMDB-51 (split 1 with additional training data).
Training setting Accuracy
Training on HMDB-51 without additional data 46.6%
Fine-tuning a ConvNet, pre-trained on UCF-101 49.0%
Training on HMDB-51 with classes added from UCF-101 52.8%
Multi-task learning on HMDB-51 and UCF-101 55.4%
utilise full (all splits combined) UCF-101 data for training (either explicitly by borrowing images, or
implicitly by pre-training). Multi-task learning performs the best, as it allows the training procedure
to exploit all available training data.
We have also experimented with multi-task learning on the UCF-101 dataset, by training a network
to classify both the full HMDB-51 data (all splits combined) and the UCF-101 data (a single split).
On the ﬁrst split of UCF-101, the accuracy was measured to be 81.5%, which improves on 81:0%
achieved using the same settings, but without the additional HMDB classiﬁcation task (Table 1b).
Two-stream ConvNets. Here we evaluate the complete two-stream model, which combines the
two recognition streams. One way of combining the networks would be to train a joint stack of
fully-connected layers on top of full6 or full7 layers of the two nets. This, however, was not feasible
in our case due to over-ﬁtting. We therefore fused the softmax scores using either averaging or
a linear SVM. From Table 3 we conclude that: (i) temporal and spatial recognition streams are
complementary, as their fusion signiﬁcantly improves on both (6%over temporal and 14% over
spatial nets); (ii) SVM-based fusion of softmax scores outperforms fusion by averaging; (iii) using
bi-directional ﬂow is not beneﬁcial in the case of ConvNet fusion; (iv) temporal ConvNet, trained
using multi-task learning, performs the best both alone and when fused with a spatial net.
Table 3: Two-stream ConvNet accuracy on UCF-101 (split 1).
Spatial ConvNet Temporal ConvNet Fusion Method Accuracy
Pre-trained + last layer bi-directional averaging 85.6%
Pre-trained + last layer uni-directional averaging 85.9%
Pre-trained + last layer uni-directional, multi-task averaging 86.2%
Pre-trained + last layer uni-directional, multi-task SVM 87.0%
Comparison with the state of the art. We conclude the experimental evaluation with the com-
parison against the state of the art on three splits of UCF-101 and HMDB-51. For that we used a
spatial net, pre-trained on ILSVRC, with the last layer trained on UCF or HMDB. The temporal
net was trained on UCF and HMDB using multi-task learning, and the input was computed using
uni-directional optical ﬂow stacking with mean subtraction. The softmax scores of the two nets were
combined using averaging or SVM. As can be seen from Table 4, both our spatial and temporal nets
alone outperform the deep architectures of [14, 16] by a large margin. The combination of the two
nets further improves the results (in line with the single-split experiments above), and is comparable
to the very recent state-of-the-art hand-crafted models [20, 21, 26].
Table 4: Mean accuracy (over three splits) on UCF-101 and HMDB-51.
Method UCF-101 HMDB-51
Improved dense trajectories (IDT) [26, 27] 85.9% 57.2%
IDT with higher-dimensional encodings [20] 87.9% 61.1%
IDT with stacked Fisher encoding [21] (based on Deep Fisher Net [23]) - 66.8%
Spatio-temporal HMAX network [11, 16] - 22.8%
“Slow fusion” spatio-temporal ConvNet [14] 65.4% -
Spatial stream ConvNet 73.0% 40.5%
Temporal stream ConvNet 83.7% 54.6%
Two-stream model (fusion by averaging) 86.9% 58.0%
Two-stream model (fusion by SVM) 88.0% 59.4%
Confusion matrix and per-class recall for UCF-101 classiﬁcation. In Fig. 5 we show the confu-
sion matrix for UCF-101 classiﬁcation using our two-stream model, which achieves 87:0%accuracy
on the ﬁrst dataset split (the last row of Table 3). We also visualise the corresponding per-class recall
in Fig. 6.
8The worst class recall corresponds to Hammering class, which is confused with HeadMassage and
BrushingTeeth classes. We found that this is due to two reasons. First, the spatial ConvNet confuses
Hammering with HeadMassage , which can be caused by the signiﬁcant presence of human faces
in both classes. Second, the temporal ConvNet confuses Hammering with BrushingTeeth , as both
actions contain recurring motion patterns (hand moving up and down).
Figure 5: Confusion matrix of a two-stream model on the ﬁrst split of UCF-101.
7 Conclusions and directions for improvement
We proposed a deep video classiﬁcation model with competitive performance, which incorporates
separate spatial and temporal recognition streams based on ConvNets. Currently it appears that
training a temporal ConvNet on optical ﬂow (as here) is signiﬁcantly better than training on raw
stacked frames [14]. The latter is probably too challenging, and might require architectural changes
(for example, a combination with the deep matching approach of [30]). Despite using optical ﬂow
as input, our temporal model does not require signiﬁcant hand-crafting, since the ﬂow is computed
using a method based on the generic assumptions of constancy and smoothness.
As we have shown, extra training data is beneﬁcial for our temporal ConvNet, so we are planning to
train it on large video datasets, such as the recently released collection of [14]. This, however, poses
a signiﬁcant challenge on its own due to the gigantic amount of training data (multiple TBs).
There still remain some essential ingredients of the state-of-the-art shallow representation [26],
which are missed in our current architecture. The most prominent one is local feature pooling
over spatio-temporal tubes, centered at the trajectories. Even though the input (2) captures the opti-
cal ﬂow along the trajectories, the spatial pooling in our network does not take the trajectories into
account. Another potential area of improvement is explicit handling of camera motion, which in our
case is compensated by mean displacement subtraction.
9Figure 6: Per-class recall of a two-stream model on the ﬁrst split of UCF-101.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by ERC grant VisRec no. 228180. We gratefully acknowledge the support
of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the GPUs used for this research.
References
[1] A. Berg, J. Deng, and L. Fei-Fei. Large scale visual recognition challenge (ILSVRC), 2010. URL
http://www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2010/ .
[2] T. Brox, A. Bruhn, N. Papenberg, and J. Weickert. High accuracy optical ﬂow estimation based on a
theory for warping. In Proc. ECCV , pages 25–36, 2004.
[3] K. Chatﬁeld, K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman. Return of the devil in the details: Delving deep
into convolutional nets. In Proc. BMVC. , 2014.
[4] B. Chen, J. A. Ting, B. Marlin, and N. de Freitas. Deep learning of invariant spatio-temporal features
from video. In NIPS Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning Workshop , 2010.
[5] R. Collobert and J. Weston. A uniﬁed architecture for natural language processing: deep neural networks
with multitask learning. In Proc. ICML , pages 160–167, 2008.
[6] K. Crammer and Y . Singer. On the algorithmic implementation of multiclass kernel-based vector ma-
chines. JMLR , 2:265–292, 2001.
[7] N. Dalal and B Triggs. Histogram of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection. In Proc. CVPR , volume 2,
pages 886–893, 2005.
[8] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, and C. Schmid. Human detection using oriented histograms of ﬂow and appearance.
InProc. ECCV , pages 428–441, 2006.
[9] M. A. Goodale and A. D. Milner. Separate visual pathways for perception and action. Trends in Neuro-
sciences , 15(1):20–25, 1992.
[10] M. Jain, H. Jegou, and P. Bouthemy. Better exploiting motion for better action recognition. In Proc.
CVPR , pages 2555–2562, 2013.
[11] H. Jhuang, T. Serre, L. Wolf, and T. Poggio. A biologically inspired system for action recognition. In
Proc. ICCV , pages 1–8, 2007.
[12] S. Ji, W. Xu, M. Yang, and K. Yu. 3D convolutional neural networks for human action recognition. IEEE
PAMI , 35(1):221–231, 2013.
[13] Y . Jia. Caffe: An open source convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding. http://caffe.
berkeleyvision.org/ , 2013.
[14] A. Karpathy, G. Toderici, S. Shetty, T. Leung, R. Sukthankar, and L. Fei-Fei. Large-scale video classiﬁ-
cation with convolutional neural networks. In Proc. CVPR , 2014.
[15] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural
networks. In NIPS , pages 1106–1114, 2012.
10[16] H. Kuehne, H. Jhuang, E. Garrote, T. Poggio, and T. Serre. HMDB: A large video database for human
motion recognition. In Proc. ICCV , pages 2556–2563, 2011.
[17] I. Laptev, M. Marszałek, C. Schmid, and B. Rozenfeld. Learning realistic human actions from movies. In
Proc. CVPR , 2008.
[18] Q. V . Le, W. Y . Zou, S. Y . Yeung, and A. Y . Ng. Learning hierarchical invariant spatio-temporal features
for action recognition with independent subspace analysis. In Proc. CVPR , pages 3361–3368, 2011.
[19] Y . LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel. Backprop-
agation applied to handwritten zip code recognition. Neural Computation , 1(4):541–551, 1989.
[20] X. Peng, L. Wang, X. Wang, and Y . Qiao. Bag of visual words and fusion methods for action recognition:
Comprehensive study and good practice. CoRR , abs/1405.4506, 2014.
[21] X. Peng, C. Zou, Y . Qiao, and Q. Peng. Action recognition with stacked ﬁsher vectors. In Proc. ECCV ,
pages 581–595, 2014.
[22] F. Perronnin, J. S ´anchez, and T. Mensink. Improving the Fisher kernel for large-scale image classiﬁcation.
InProc. ECCV , 2010.
[23] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman. Deep Fisher networks for large-scale image classiﬁcation.
InNIPS , 2013.
[24] K. Soomro, A. R. Zamir, and M. Shah. UCF101: A dataset of 101 human actions classes from videos in
the wild. CoRR , abs/1212.0402, 2012.
[25] G. W. Taylor, R. Fergus, Y . LeCun, and C. Bregler. Convolutional learning of spatio-temporal features.
InProc. ECCV , pages 140–153, 2010.
[26] H. Wang and C. Schmid. Action recognition with improved trajectories. In Proc. ICCV , pages 3551–3558,
2013.
[27] H. Wang and C. Schmid. LEAR-INRIA submission for the THUMOS workshop. In ICCV Workshop on
Action Recognition with a Large Number of Classes , 2013.
[28] H. Wang, M. M. Ullah, A. Kl ¨aser, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid. Evaluation of local spatio-temporal features
for action recognition. In Proc. BMVC. , pages 1–11, 2009.
[29] H. Wang, A. Kl ¨aser, C. Schmid, and C.-L. Liu. Action recognition by dense trajectories. In Proc. CVPR ,
pages 3169–3176, 2011.
[30] P. Weinzaepfel, J. Revaud, Z. Harchaoui, and C. Schmid. DeepFlow: Large displacement optical ﬂow
with deep matching. In Proc. ICCV , pages 1385–1392, 2013.
[31] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. CoRR , abs/1311.2901,
2013.
11